Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/foar

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Optimization-based design exploration
of building massing typologiesdEvoMass
and a typology-oriented computational
design optimization method for early-stage
performance-based building massing design
Likai Wang a,*, Patrick Janssen b, Guohua Ji c
a

Design School, Xi’an JiaotongeLiverpool University, Suzhou 215123, China
Packhunt, Amsterdam, Netherlands
c
School of Architecture and Urban Planning, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
b

Received 12 September 2023; received in revised form 20 May 2024; accepted 1 June 2024

KEYWORDS
Computational
design;
Design optimization;
Design exploration;
Design process;
Building typology;
Building massing

Abstract In the past decade, there has been an increasing recognition of the role of computational design optimization in early-stage performance-based architectural design exploration. However, it remains challenging for designers to apply such optimization-based design
explorations in practice. To address this issue, this paper introduces a design tool, called EvoMass, and an associated design method that facilitates design exploration for building massing
typologies in performance-based design tasks. EvoMass is capable of offering architects design
options reflecting performance-related building massing typologies for the design task, without
necessitating advanced computational design skills. More importantly, it can provide architects
with insights into the underlying performance implications, thereby enhancing early-stage performance-based design exploration. EvoMass and its associated design method overcome the
limitation in the conventional typology-first-optimization-second design procedure adopted
by most existing tools, and it promotes a typology-oriented design exploration method of using
computational optimization in performance-based architectural design. To demonstrate the
efficacy of EvoMass, case studies derived from architectural design studio tasks, incorporating
daylighting, solar exposure, and subjective design intents, and the result of a user survey are
presented, which highlights how EvoMass and the performance-based design optimization and
exploration can enable architects to achieve a more performance-aware design.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: likai.wang@xjtlu.edu.cn (L. Wang).
Peer review under responsibility of Southeast University.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foar.2024.06.001
2095-2635/ª 2024 The Author(s). Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422
ª 2024 The Author(s). Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co.
Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction
Building massing design plays a critical role in achieving
high-performance and environmentally-responsive architectural design. In practice, architects often invest significant time and effort in manipulating building massing forms
to enhance design performance, such as energy consumption, daylight accessibility, and solar heat gain. Nevertheless, such manual trial-and-error design methods are
inefficient and prone to errors. Recent advancements in
parametric modeling, computational optimization, and
building performance simulation have enabled performance-based design optimization (Ekici et al., 2019;
Wortmann and Nannicini, 2017). By incorporating these
three components, design variants can be automatically
generated, evaluated, and optimized, leading to an incremental enhancement of design performance. This approach
is widely acknowledged as a more efficient and effective
strategy for achieving performance-based building design
(Li et al., 2020).
In the research literature, performance-based design
optimization has widely been applied to detailed and welldefined design tasks aimed at maximizing specific building
performance factors. More recently, there has been a shift
in focus toward supporting architects in early-stage design
exploration (Bradner et al., 2014; Caldas, 2008; Marsault
and Torres, 2019; Turrin et al., 2011). Contrary to solely
improving building performance, optimization can also
facilitate architects in exploring various design options and
extracting relevant performance implications associated
with building design. This enables a performance-aware
design process amid the data-poor and open-ended early
design stage when facing ill-defined and “wicked” design
tasks. Such optimization-based design exploration has
been increasingly recognized and exploited by researchers
over the past few years (Chen et al., 2019; Ekici et al.,
2019) and has been applied to various aspects related to
early-stage architectural design, including building massing
design (Chen et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2022; Estrado et al.,
2023), architectural spatial layout design (Dino, 2016), and
building skins and facades (Zhang et al., 2021).
Despite recent advancements in research, applying
optimization-based design exploration to architectural
design scenarios remains challenging. On the one hand,
encoding design concepts and conducting parametric
modeling are technically and cognitively demanding and
time-consuming. On the other hand, the overall form and
typology of the building, in most cases, often have to be
predetermined and hardcoded during the parametric
modeling phase (Si et al., 2019). For instance, in relevant
studies, the typology of buildings with central courtyards is
often selected for optimization. However, due to the hardcoded nature of this typology in parametric models, alternative design typologies cannot be explored through

optimization. This approach restricts the optimization
process from surpassing the limitations imposed by predetermined forms and typologies. These two issues make
optimization-based design exploration costly in terms of
time and effort while failing to meet architects’ expectations regarding information feedback and design space
exploration.
To address these limitations and challenges, this study
presents a design tool, called EvoMass and the corresponding method aimed to facilitate an iterative
optimization-based design exploration of building massing
typologies to support early-stage architectural design.
EvoMass is specifically designed to produce diverse and
high-performing design options that are able to communicate both tangible and abstract design information related
to building massing typologies. With the use of EvoMass,
architects can conduct a rapid and iterative optimizationbased design exploration to systemically investigate the
design solution space and identify key information for
design ideation and development.
This study is intended to advance the research on the
application of computational optimization to early-stage
architectural design and demonstrate how EvoMass can
offer a design method better aligning with architects’
design exploration, ideation, and synthesis processes. From
here on, the term “building typology” refers only to
building designs with distinct spatial configurations, such as
those featuring central courtyards or stepped volumes.
Architectural design styles, such as orthogonal and curvilinear building forms, are not considered separate
typologies.
After this section, the paper first discusses the issue of
typological inflexibility and relevant design modeling approaches for addressing this issue. Following this discussion, the paper elaborates on EvoMass and the associated
design exploration method as well as how the tool and the
design method can overcome typological inflexibility in
optimization-based design exploration. The method introduces a novel utilization of computational design optimization to tackle ill-defined and open-ended problems in
early-stage architectural design and is aimed to facilitate
designers to conduct rapid optimization-based design
exploration of building massing design. Moreover, to further
explain how EvoMass can facilitate optimization-based
design exploration, differences between the parametric
schema employed in EvoMass and those commonly used in
similar tools or studies are compared from the perspective
of design solution space. This enhances the understanding
of how different parametric modeling strategies impact
optimization-based design exploration.
The utility of the EvoMass and the associated design
method is subsequently demonstrated. To better capture
the complexity and challenges inherent in real-world scenarios, this study presents practical applications of EvoMass

1401

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji
in realistic design studio tasks, incorporating daylighting,
solar exposure, and wind permeability, along with a survey
from actual users, thereby providing greater practical significance. Finally, we conclude by discussing the implications of this study for both research and architectural
education while also highlighting potential avenues for
future research.

2. Background
Both the architectural design industry and the research
community have dedicated significant effort to supporting
performance-based building massing design. Within the
architectural design industry, several tools have been
developed to facilitate rapid creation, modification, and
evaluation of building massing design, including Blox Platform (Greer and Lucas), SiteSolve (RAMBOLL), Sandbox I/O
(Psarras et al., 2020), Delve (Sidewalk Labs). In the
research community, building massing design also plays a
significant role in relevant studies that integrate with
various computational techniques, such as performance
evaluations (Chen et al., 2018) and predictions (Estrado et
al., 2023), to evaluate and exploit the performance potential of the building massing design. However, most of the
tool developments and studies in this field do not prioritize
design generation algorithms for building massing forms.
Instead, they commonly employed generation algorithms
that are based on simple parametric schemas (Huang et al.,
2015; Janssen et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2021). Consequently,
these tools and studies often suffer from the typological
inflexibility of building massing forms.

2.1. Typological inflexibility
Over the past two decades, the development of computational design programs such as Rhino-Grasshopper and
Revit-Dynamo has provided designers with user-friendly and
accessible tools, significantly accelerating and streamlining
the process for designers to conduct design optimization
focused on building massing forms. While applying computational design optimization in early-stage building design
has become commonplace among many designers and offices, the challenge lies in conceiving and encoding intricate design schemas where designers are often confined to
a limited range of building generation options and strategies, such as twist, slant, and rotation (Harding and
Shepherd, 2017). In addition, as the design generation algorithm in early-stage architectural design is typically
completed “on the fly”, the ad hoc algorithm tends to be
simple and results in a significant degree of “lock-in”
regarding building typologies, which exasperates the
problem of inflexibility (Chaszar and Joyce, 2016).
The typological inflexibility of the design generation
algorithm imposes constraints on the design solution space
(Sheikholeslami, 2010; Wang, 2022a; Woodbury and Burrow,
2006). This limits the optimization process in its search for
solutions with desirable performance, as it typically generates design variants that adhere to one single or a limited
number of predetermined building typologies (Harding
et al., 2013; Harding and Shepherd, 2017; Sheikholeslami,
2010), such as buildings with a central courtyard (Chen

et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2023) and high-rise point towers
(Estrado et al., 2023). At the same time, this results in
various applications featuring building shapes such as
twisted (Jin and Jeong, 2014; Valiyappurakkal et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2016) or shoebox geometries with varying dimensions (Lin et al., 2021). This tendency can result in
relatively predictable optimization outcomes.
Although typological inflexibility is often overlooked by
relevant studies and applications due to various reasons, a
few researchers have attempted to tackle this issue in
different ways. The rest of this section selects and discusses three major strategies that are often applied to increase design diversity and differentiation among the
generated design, including combinatory algorithms, genetic programming, and generic parametric schemas.

2.2. Combinatory algorithms
A direct approach to addressing typological inflexibility is
developing a combinatory algorithm that incorporates
multiple sub-algorithms, each encoding a parametric
schema representing a distinct building typology. For
instance, a combinatory algorithm may encompass subalgorithms capable of generating buildings with an L-shaped, U-shaped, or I-shaped footprint. This results in designs
that feature significant architectural design differentiation
(Chen et al., 2018; Ciardiello et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2016). However, the creation, modification, and maintenance of multiple sub-algorithms pose complex challenges
that can disrupt architects’ design processes (Nault et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2019).
In addition, using such modeling approaches makes it
difficult to achieve a higher level of design diversity. Due to
people’s cognitive limitations, only a small number of typologies can be included and implemented. At the same
time, as each typology is typically implemented as a
separate sub-algorithm and is generated independently,
this results in the integration of different typologies unattainable. In light of this, combinatory algorithms are more
suitable for design tasks with several predetermined design
typologies, and the optimization is aimed at searching for
the one that can yield the greatest performance benefit.
Nevertheless, for early-stage design tasks with design typologies undecided, this approach will fall short of the need
to generate designs with sufficient diversity and differentiation in terms of typologies.

2.3. Genetic programming
Genetic programming is another viable approach to generating diverse designs (Harding and Shepherd, 2017; Joyce
and Ibrahim, 2017). This technique can create generative
schemas and algorithms by connecting a set of predefined
functional operators. Since the connection of operators is
created automatically and rapidly, this facilitates the
exploration of a wide spectrum of designs with minimal
programming effort and can be effectively integrated with
search/optimization algorithms to evolve designs for
various objectives (Harding and Brandt-Olsen, 2018). At the
same time, with varying generative schemas, the underpinning design generative logic is also different, which

1402

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422
leads to designs with distinct features. However, this
approach requires users to provide highly abstract instructions for guiding the computer in correctly combining
generative operators, such as a sequence of Grasshopper
functional components. Furthermore, when the generated
algorithm is complex, it has the tendency to produce
chaotic and invalid designs (Joyce and Ibrahim, 2017).

2.4. Generic parametric schemas
In contrast to developing multiple sub-algorithms or using
complex genetic programming, developing generic parametric schemas presents a promising approach that can be
adapted and reused for various design tasks. Several studies
focusing on performance-based optimization at the urban
design scale proposed design generation algorithms capable
of producing diverse urban forms. Such generic algorithms
often represent and encode abstract generative strategies
or approaches, rather than specific design typologies
commonly employed in combinatory algorithms. This enables greater design flexibility and diversity, rendering
them particularly valuable for initial exploration that necessitates a systematic examination of various design typologies. As these algorithms do not generate specific
typologies of designs, they also have the advantage that
can be adapted and customized to suit different urban
design tasks. The utilization of such generic algorithms
simplifies the application of parametric urban design optimization (Koenig et al., 2020; Nault et al., 2018; von
Richthofen et al., 2018) and make the optimization “agile
to changing input constraints and offers flexible solutions
that can be re-computed depending on stakeholder
perspective” (von Richthofen et al., 2018).
At the architectural design scale, attempts have also
been made to create generic and re-useable algorithms for
building design generation and optimization with hierarchical (Yi and Malkawi, 2012) or voxel-based (Konis et al.,
2016; Luca et al., 2021; Marsault and Torres, 2019)
modeling approaches. These algorithms typically generate
folded, free-form, or pixelated building geometries that
can have higher geometric freedom. Driven by the optimization algorithm, these algorithms are able to produce siteand task-specific solutions that adapt to new design settings
and optimization objectives. However, the practicality of
optimized designs based on such geometries often falls
short, and architects may encounter difficulties in comprehending the performance implications revealed by
optimized designs, as the formal definitions and attributes
inherent in such intricate building shapes tend to be
imprecise and ambiguous. This issue underscores that while
greater geometric freedom can lead to a higher level of
diversity and variability in building design generation, the
effectiveness of such algorithms could be compromised due
to the absence of architectural design rules and knowledge
(Tian et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018).

3. Design exploration method
The proposed design exploration method is based on a
computational design optimization workflow, wherein the
iterative optimization process explores design variants and

searches for high-performance solutions within the defined
generative schema. However, unlike conventional applications of computational design optimization in performancebased design scenarios that focus solely on identifying the
optimal solution, the proposed design method aims to
facilitate an iterative performance-based optimization
process, enabling designers to progressively enhance the
results or gather feedback for more informed decisionmaking through multiple optimization runs (Fig. 1). In each
iteration, designers can extract knowledge from previous
optimization runs and adjust configurations of subsequent
ones, resulting in what we term iterative optimizationbased design exploration.
The iterative optimization-based design exploration also
facilitates a co-evolutionary human-computer design process, which enables the discovery of high-performance solutions through the interpretation of optimization
iterations and their corresponding results. When implementing the design method, designers are expected to
perform multiple optimization runs focusing on different
design solution spaces and/or different performance factors. In this way, designers can obtain rich performance
information feedback from multiple perspectives and synthesize the information in the design development process
(Fig. 1-1 and the examples described in Sections 4.1 and
4.2). Moreover, the extracted information can also serve
as motivation for designers to reformulate and reframe the
design problem while iteratively adjusting the direction of
the optimization search (Fig. 1-2, 1-3 and the example
described in Section 4.3).
The proposed design exploration method is based on the
utilization of EvoMass, where the design generation algorithm and its delineation of the design solution space within
EvoMass play a pivotal role in facilitating optimization to
search for desirable designs that can provide valuable insights for architects to comprehend the design problem and
make informed decisions at the initial stage. In this context,
building typologies are given priority in EvoMass development, with the aim of identifying building typologies worthy
of further investigation and development. Furthermore,
software implementation, optimization execution, as well
as design customization and information extraction are integral components enhancing the applicability of the proposed method in architectural design tasks. This section is
dedicated to elaborating on these aspects.

3.1. Typology-oriented design generation
In routine applications of performance-based design optimization, building typologies are typically predetermined
prior to the parametric modeling process as mentioned
earlier. As a result, only certain aspects of the design are
allowed to vary in the parametric model, such as the size
and dimension of specific design components, limiting the
range of options allowed to be explored and potential enhancements in performance. At the same time, this tendency further reinforces the focus on secondary
geometrical effects, such as twisting and slanting, over
exploring more meaningful architectural design variability.
Although these secondary geometrical effects can lead
to certain performance improvements for a given building

1403

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Fig. 1

The proposed design process of optimization-based design exploration.

typology, they are less decisive compared to those resulting
from altering the typology itself. Nevertheless, the building
typology, with a significant impact on the overall performance of the building, is often defined a priori and cannot
be varied during the parametric exploration process.
Despite its importance, it is observed that most researchers
have paid limited attention to exploring design spaces
encompassing various building typologies during early-stage
architectural design (Harding et al., 2013; Harding and
Shepherd, 2017; Wu, 2022). Conversely, within the
broader design science research community, there is
widespread recognition of the significance of exploring
design options and alternatives that possess structural differences. Such variations can provide distinct advantages
during the conceptual design stage, enabling designers to
gain valuable insights into the trade-offs and compromises
inherent in the design problem (Cross, 2021; Harding and
Shepherd, 2017; Lawson, 1990).
The existing design approach mentioned above can be
characterized as a typology-first-optimization-second procedure. In the development of EvoMass, we attempt to
reverse the sequence of this procedure by embedding the
design exploration of building typologies into the optimization process, thereby enabling a typology-oriented
design optimization. This allows computers to assist architects in conducting preliminary and systematic design
explorations for various building typologies prior to making
design decisions. Hence, developing design generation algorithms that can produce designs with significant diversity
in terms of building typologies is a critical step to achieving
this goal.

3.2. Design generation algorithms
To achieve desirable typological variability, EvoMass has
two independent building massing generation algorithms

developed using generic and abstract architectural design
knowledge (Wang et al., 2020a). The two building massing
generation algorithms embody the principles of subtractive
and additive form generation respectively (Simitch and
Warke, 2014). From the perspective of building design,
these two principles can describe most regular building
massing forms, and the manipulation of masses and voids is
one of the most common strategies for architectural design
(Ching, 2007). Furthermore, these two manipulation approaches are closely associated with a wide range of passive design strategies such as atriums, stilts, self-shading,
and solar envelopes (Wang et al., 2023). Therefore, the
abstraction and encoding of these two principles can, in
turn, allow computers to generate a wide variety of
possible massing design options with differing typologies
while incorporating various combinations of passive design
strategies.
Figure 2 demonstrates the key procedure of how the two
algorithms generate building massing designs. The two algorithms, named the subtractive design generation algorithm and additive design generation algorithm, employ
Boolean differences and union on cuboids to achieve the
subtraction and addition of the building massing form
generation. In these two algorithms, a design is created
either by removing several parts within a predefined volume (the subtractive one) or by aggregating several mass
volumes within a predefined boundary (the additive one).
For each subtractive void or additive volume, six parameters are required to define the size (length, width, height)
and location (x, y, z). To ensure the optimization is
computationally manageable, the maximum number of
subtractive voids or additive volume is limited to ten.
Boolean operations have been used in computational
design to generate building massing through recursion
(Coates and Derix, 2014), shape grammars (Dy and Stouffs,
2018; Müller et al., 2006), and parametric approaches

1404

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422

Fig. 2

Generative procedure of the subtractive and additive design generation algorithms.

(Chen et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2015; Luca et al., 2021) to
generate building massing forms. Nonetheless, previous
applications are often loosely-constrained or overconstrained in terms of geometrical flexibility, leading to
designs that lack either architectural feasibility (e.g.,
fractal geometries) or typological variability (e.g., buildings
only with one subtractive void in a fixed position). To
address these issues, the proposed generation algorithms
incorporate a set of rules such as alignment and gridding to
eliminate non-architectural features while ensuring high
geometrical variability. Detailed descriptions of these
specific rules can be found in prior studies (Wang et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2020a).
It is worth noting that the two generation algorithms do
not inherently generate specific building typologies, such as
courtyard buildings and strip-type buildings. Instead,
building typologies emerge from the design produced by
these algorithms and require interpretation by the architect. For example, when utilizing the subtractive design
generation algorithm, it can create a building form with its
central part “subtracted” from a predefined box volume.
Nevertheless, the definition of “this is a building with a
central courtyard” will need to be given by the architect
who interprets this building form. As a result, the full
application of EvoMass in architectural design exploration
also critically relies on architects’ interpretation and
perception of the generated design. Further elaboration on
this aspect can be found in Sections 3.3 and 3.5.

3.3. Design solution spaces
The distinction between other commonly-used parametric
modeling strategies and the two algorithms in EvoMass can
be further elucidated through the lens of the design solution space. When the design generation algorithm solely
describes and represents a predetermined building typology, all the design variants in the design solution space are
a specific embodiment of the underpinning building

typology. This particular design solution space can be
viewed as one subspace within the realm of all alternative
design solutions (Fig. 3, left). Two issues arise when such
design solution spaces are employed for optimization-based
design exploration.
First, the building typology of the design solution space
may not be a suitable typology for the given design problem. Since all design variants will adhere to the same
flawed typology, the optimization process is unlikely to help
architects uncover and detect these flaws. Furthermore,
the fact that the optimization process produces design
variants that steadily improve in performance may also
leave the designer with false confidence which may reinforce their trust in the selected design typology.
Second, designers can create a combinatory algorithm as
mentioned in Section 2.2 to explore and compare different
building typologies. However, this process is both laborious
and time-consuming. Furthermore, even if there is a
combinatory algorithm encompassing different building
typologies, the delineated design solution spaces are typically disjointed and lack integration. In other words, each
design variant must originate from one distinct subspace
and actualize the building typology embodied by that subspace (Fig. 3, middle). Consequently, it is not possible to
synergize the strengths of designs derived from different
subspaces into one integrated design variant; thus, precluding the opportunity to harness collective advantages
offered by various building typologies and design strategies.
Contrary to the above-mentioned design generation and
representation approaches, the subtractive and additive algorithms do not explicitly represent any specific building
typology. In contrast, they generate designs, from which the
traits and features of different building typologies emerge,
requiring interpretation by architects as mentioned in Section 3.2. In this way, the two algorithms implicitly merge and
unify various subspaces that represent diverse building typologies (Fig. 3, right). As a result, one design variant can
encompass a multitude of distinct traits and features associated with different design typologies, such as courtyards

1405

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Fig. 3 Comparison of the design solution (phenotype-fitness) spaces defined by conventional design generation algorithms (left)
and subtractive/additive design generation algorithm (right).

and stepped volumes, as well as various passive design
strategies, such as self-shading and solar envelopes. This
enables the optimization process to extensively explore
different building typologies and identify an optimal combination of typologies for maximizing performance.
The design solution space defined by the two algorithms
comprises abstract building typologies, and each design
within the design solution space can be interpreted as a
representation of a group of design variants sharing the
same typology. Thus, the design variants from each abstract building typology can also be viewed as a secondary
design solution space that necessitates further exploration
subsequent to the initial investigation (Fig. 4). Architects
can explore this secondary solution space in a more conventional manner by developing a series of design solutions
or incorporating other bespoke architectural languages,
such as curvilinear or free-form geometry.

Fig. 4

3.4. Software implementation and optimization
execution
Apart from the design generation, the optimization algorithm that searches for high-performance options in the
design solution space also plays a critical role in supporting
the design exploration. In this regard, EvoMass includes a
hybrid evolutionary algorithm integrating a steady-state
replacement strategy and an island-based model, called
Steady-State Island Evolutionary Algorithm (SSIEA) (Wang
et al., 2020). The combination of the two strategies can
improve the search efficiency and design diversity of the
optimization result at the same time.
On one hand, the steady-state replacement strategy
only selects a small number of design variants from the
population for subsequent evolutionary operations such as

Design solution space defined by the subtractive/additive algorithm and the secondary design solution space.

1406

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422
crossover and mutation. These selected design variants are
used to create offspring designs, and those with improved
fitness replace low-fitness designs within the original population. This facilitates the early influence of promising
designs on the evolutionary process, in contrast to standard
optimization algorithms that employ generational replacement strategies. Moreover, this further increases evolutionary pressure and expedites the convergence of the
optimization search.
On the other hand, the island-based model divides the
design population into multiple sub-populations, each
guided to explore distinct regions of the design solution
space in order to maintain diversity within the design
population. When using the two building massing design
generation algorithms, the design solution space defined by
the subtractive or additive algorithm may have multiple
regions that contain design options with high fitness.
Consequently, by incorporating the island-based model,
SSIEA can effectively screen out more distinct design options with competitive performance than other standard
evolutionary algorithms with a centralized population
model. Furthermore, the island-based model also enables
implicit clustering as design variants within an island tend
to become more similar throughout the evolutionary process. This also facilitates the designers to explore other
similar design variants within the same island where the
identified optimal solution resides.

Fig. 5

EvoMass has been implemented as a library of components on the Rhino-Grasshopper platform (Wang et al.,
2020b). The two generation algorithms are implemented
as two EvoMass Building Generators, while SSIEA is encapsulated as the EvoMass Evolver. With this library, different
workflows for various performance-based building design
tasks can be created in a plug-and-play manner. Within the
Rhino-Grasshopper platform, EvoMass Building Generator
and Evolver can be directly connected to other building
performance simulation tools, such as ClimateStudio and
Ladybug Tools, to establish a design optimization workflow
(Fig. 5) and to perform the optimization process. Moreover,
the integration of the design generation and optimization
function of EvoMass, as illustrated in the lower section of
Fig. 5, results in a relatively compact Grasshopper network
compared to typical networks comprising tens or even
hundreds of components.
Within an established workflow using EvoMass in Grasshopper, the designer is only required to specify three inputs:
1) the design scenario (e.g., building site, design context), 2)
optimization objectives (e.g., maximizing daylighting,
reducing solar exposure), and 3) constraints on the building
massing generation (e.g., floor numbers, footprints). Once
the inputs have been defined, the workflow can be
executed. Furthermore, this workflow can be re-used on
different design tasks if the performance objectives are
similar. For instance, an established workflow can be applied

A design optimization workflow established using EvoMass and Ladybug.

1407

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji
to different architectural design tasks, such as high-rise
towers or commercial complexes, provided that the same
building simulation and design evaluation are also applicable
to the new design task. The designer only needs to customize
the building type of the generated design by updating parameters in the design generation algorithm and adjusting
geolocation in the performance simulation tool.

3.5. Design customization and information
extraction
In order to enhance the usability, facilitating designers in
configuring the design generation process and effectively
collecting information from the optimization are also
prioritized in the development of EvoMass. Regarding
design configuration, designers can customize the design
generation process through a set of user-defined parameters and constraints (Fig. 6). For example, designers can
specify the maximum building volume when using the subtractive design generation algorithm or the spatial boundary when using the additive design generation algorithm,
which defines the key design parameters of the generated
building massing forms, such as floor numbers and volumetric sizes (Fig. 7). In addition, there are other parameters and constraints available for users to define more
specific or nuanced variations of the generated design, such
as the number and the size range of subtractive voids or
additive volumes.
Figure 8 illustrates a set of designs randomly produced
by the two algorithms using different inputs and constraints
in certain key user-defined parameters. On the one hand,
designers can customize the formal characteristics, such as
solid and fragmented building forms, of the generated

Fig. 6

design by changing parameters, including the number of
additive masses and the size constraint of these masses
(Wang, 2022b) (see the upper section of Fig. 8). This can
make the optimized design options better align with architects’ bespoke design intents. In addition, modifying the
user-defined parameters also allows designers to regulate
the overall formal characteristics and control the design
variability and differentiation in generated designs, as
demonstrated in the first and third rows as well as the
fourth and sixth rows. This also allows the designer to tailor
the “span” of the design solution space (Wang, 2022a).
On the other hand, even under the same user-defined
parameters, the random sampling of designs exhibits significant differentiation in building typologies such as
buildings incorporating different numbers of courtyards/
atriums or with different footprints (L-shaped or U-shaped).
From the perspective of building performance, these features can effectively differentiate the strengths and
weaknesses of each design when confronted with different
micro-climates and surrounding urban environments. The
differentiation demonstrated among these generated designs is essential to satisfy the needs for the optimization to
identify site- and task-specific solutions under varying
design scenarios and performance objectives.
Regarding information extraction, the formal features
displayed in the optimized design is the major medium for
designers to interpret the design implications associated
with the building performance, such as passive design
strategies and specific building typologies. In EvoMass, the
application of Boolean operations on cuboids results in all
generated building massing designs by the two algorithms
being orthogonal. This approach inevitably excludes complex building massing forms, such as curved and non-

User interfaces of the two design generation algorithm components.

1408

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422

Fig. 7 Designs generated according to different user-defined parameter inputs (reflecting different building types, the number of
horizontal size constraints indicates the number of structural bays, and the number of vertical size constraints indicates the
number of floors).

orthogonal geometries. Despite this fact, the designs
generated through EvoMass still possess the potential for
further transformation into more intricate building geometries. For instance, Fig. 4, illustrates the conversion of a
cubical void in the optimized design into a tilted façade
with a folded surface or curved surface on the main
elevation of the building, both of which reflect the same
performance implication associated with the self-shading
strategy.
Furthermore, experienced designers are expected to be
capable of implementing more radical modifications in the
generated designs or integrating extracted information from
these designs into the design synthesis process that incorporates other bespoke design intents or functional considerations. For instance, formal features associated with
self-shading can offer indications for the need to reduce
solar exposure, inspiring designers to explore alternative
design options such as incorporating external shading devices or decreasing the window-to-wall ratio in specific
sections of the building facade. In some other cases, optimized designs may exhibit volumetric recession to avoid
shadows cast by surrounding buildings, offering cues for
designers to allocate rooms with varying lighting requirements more effectively. Conversely, less-experienced
designers, such as the students involved in the case-study
design tasks presented in the subsequent section, can utilize
EvoMass-generated designs as initial prototypes and tangible
references for further development (Wang, 2022).

4. Studio design tasks
To further demonstrate the proposed design exploration
method and offer more tangible examples of the iterative

and the typology-oriented design exploration process,
three studio design tasks using EvoMass and the design
method are presented. The selected examples in this study
effectively demonstrate the practical applicability of EvoMass within complex and dynamic real-world design processes. This distinguishes this study from other similar
studies that typically adopt a controlled and simplified
design scenario for case studies, where only performance
issues are considered without subsequent design development after obtaining an optimized solution. These design
tasks were part of a computational design elective, conducted at Nanjing University. The design tasks encompass
educational buildings, high-rise office towers, and commercial buildings. The diversity of the design tasks also
highlights the versatility of EvoMass. Three representative
design projects were selected to illustrate how students
with limited expertise in computational design can effectively utilize EvoMass to accomplish their respective tasks.
Key parameters and information pertaining to these designs
are summarized in Table 1.

4.1. Educational building design
The first example presents a design for a university
educational building complex situated in a dense urban
environment in Wuhan, China. This multifunctional building
is envisioned to accommodate lecture rooms/halls, design
studios, offices, and canteens. In this example, EvoMass
was employed by students to generate building massing
designs with a focus on optimizing daylighting and passive
solar energy utilization. Both subtractive and additive
design generation algorithms were utilized. The initial
optimization process aims at maximizing overall daylight

1409

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Fig. 8 Designs generated according to different user-defined parameter inputs (reflecting different formal characteristics, the
number of horizontal size constraints indicates the number of structural bays, and the number of vertical size constraints indicates
the number of floors).

Table 1

Key design parameters and information of the selected examples.
Location

Example Wuhan,
1
China
Example Nanjing,
2
China

Functionality

Gross Height
Area Limitation
(m2) (m)

Plot Designers
Ratio

Third-party tools used

Middle-rise
Educational
Buildings
High-rise Office
Buildings

18,000 24

2.0

4 master (year 1)
students

DIVA (for daylighting and solar
irradiation simulation)

35,000 100

7.7

1 undergraduate
(year 4) student

11,000 24

4.0

4 undergraduate
(year 3) students

Ladybug (for solar irradiation
simulation)
ClimateStudio (for daylighting
simulation)
GH_Wind (for wind flow
simulation)
Ladybug Tools (for solar
irradiation simulation)
ClimateStudio (for daylighting
simulation)

Example Shanghai, Middle-rise
3
China
Commercial
Buildings

accessibility while also optimizing passive solar heat utilization by reducing summer solar heat gain and increasing
winter heat retention.
The diagram presented in Fig. 9 is derived from one of
the diagrams featured in the final design poster, reflecting

how the students have organized and synthesized the information obtained from optimization processes. This diagram showcases a compilation of designs that have evolved
through multiple iterations of optimization runs, encompassing designs ranked at high, middle, and low levels. The

1410

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422

Fig. 9 The optimization-based design exploration with EvoMass. First row: Additive modeling. Second row: Subtractive modeling.
First column: optimization for daylight maximization. Second column: optimization for solar energy maximization. Third column:
optimization for maximizing both daylight and energy. Bottom: the selection of final design options).

designs in Fig. 9 are divided into two rows and three columns, showcasing the outcomes from the initial
optimization-based design exploration employing additive
and subtractive generation algorithms. The first and second
columns respectively exhibit the optimization results for
daylight maximization and passive solar heat utilization.
The third column demonstrates the optimization outcomes
achieved by utilizing weight-sum functions to integrate
both objectives of maximizing daylight and passive solar
heat utilization. Each design is accompanied by a percentage value at the bottom left corner indicating its
relative performance compared to the overall design population, where 100% represents the best design discovered
during the optimization process.
The initial design exploration (the left and middle columns in Fig. 9) facilitates the identification of several key
design features associated with performance improvement.
In terms of daylight accessibility, strip-shaped volumes
(depicted with green-colored roofs) and central courtyards
(depicted with orange-colored grounds) emerge as dominant design typologies in the optimization result. Both
building configurations contribute to reducing the depth of
floor plans that enhance the penetration of daylight into
deeper areas of the building. Regarding passive solar heat
utilization, the high-performing design options (depicted
with dark/grey blue-colored roofs) exhibit staggered and

stepped cascade volumes, gradually rising from south to
north. This configuration aligns with context shading by
allowing more building volume to escape from shadows cast
by neighboring high-rise buildings on its southern side.
Additionally, cantilevered blocks (depicted as pink-colored
volumes) are incorporated in the northwest corner to provide self-shading against intense direct sunlight during
summer afternoons, effectively reducing excessive solar
exposure.
The predominant performance-related features of the
optimized design options (strip-shaped or staggering volumes), however, compromise the overall aesthetic quality,
rendering them impractical for further development.
Consequently, the students further utilized EvoMass to
conduct optimization using weight-sum functions in order
to integrate both performance objectives (daylighting
enhancement and solar heat reduction). The purpose of
conducting the third round of optimizations is not only to
search for a design that can achieve a better balance between the two performance objectives but also to explore
the utilization of EvoMass as a form-finding approach. Since
the optimization has to simultaneously satisfy both performance objectives, the features identified in the first two
rounds of optimization runs are compromised and less
prominent. This also leads to several design options
featuring interlocking volumes and well-balanced

1411

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji
volumetric compositions, which are more conducive to accommodating functional and aesthetic demands, suggesting
that these designs warrant further exploration and development (refer to the third column in Fig. 9).
The students chose one design option from the third
round of optimizations for further development (Fig. 9
bottom). The chosen design features a courtyard integrated with multiple interconnected volumes. Adjustments
were made to incorporate the key features identified in the
first two rounds of optimizations into the chosen design.
Specifically, the stepped cascade terrace surrounding the
courtyard is reinforced to enhance daylight penetration
into the lower part of the building, while a self-shading
mechanism is implemented in the northwest corner to
prevent summer overheating (Fig. 10). Moreover, these
performance considerations also informed other design
aspects. For instance, external shading screens are applied
to west-facing facades as a measure against excessive solar
exposure and resulting heat buildup. Additionally, when
arranging different indoor functional spaces, daylight
accessibility of different parts of the building was taken
into account by the students.

4.2. High-rise office building design
The second example presents a design for a high-rise office
building. In this case, the overall design process follows a
similar approach as in the first example. However, prior to
initiating the optimization process, the student was guided
to conduct a site analysis using various building performance simulation tools and the building design generator of
EvoMass. This step aims to provide the student with an

Fig. 10

initial understanding of how building massing interacts with
its surrounding environment. Simultaneously, it prevents
the student from being overwhelmed by technical complexities associated with computational design optimization, such as configuring evolutionary algorithms. When
conducting the site analysis, only Building Generators of
EvoMass were utilized to generate a random sampling of
designs employing the additive design generation algorithm. Subsequently, performance analysis was conducted
on these sampled designs.
The site analysis investigates the impact of different
high-rise building massing configurations on the surrounding
environment in terms of wind flow and sunlight hours
(Fig. 11). It examines how building massing influences these
factors, including the shading effects caused by different
building massing volumes and wind permeability resulting
from different building footprints. Simultaneously, it enables the student to identify trade-offs between improved
daylighting and the risk of overheating, as well as between
daylight accessibility, assessed using spatial daylight autonomy (sDA), for the target building and potential
obstruction of sunlight to neighboring buildings.
Informed by the site analysis, the student subsequently
formulated an objective function that incorporated factors
including sunlight hours of surrounding buildings, solar
exposure, and daylight accessibility (sDA) of the target
building. However, due to the time-consuming flow dynamic simulation, wind-related performance was not
considered in the optimization process. Nevertheless, in
the next stage of design selection, the student’s decisionmaking is still influenced by performance implications
associated with wind permeability.

The final design work developed from the selected design.

1412

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422

Fig. 11 Examples of the site analysis on wind permeability (left) and sunlight hours (right) based on random sampling designs
generated by the additive design generation algorithm.

The optimization result, shown in the upper section of
Fig. 12, presents multiple design options showcasing attributes that can mitigate sunlight obstruction to surrounding
buildings while simultaneously enhancing daylight accessibility for the target building. Moreover, the student utilized
a formal characteristic identified in the site analysis to
evaluate these options in terms of wind-related performance. Based on the wind flow pattern depicted in Fig. 11
(right), designs with wider dimensions towards the south
and narrower dimensions towards the north can effectively
facilitate unobstructed airflow of prevailing southeast
winds during summer while efficiently obstructing chilly
northeast winds in winter. Consequently, this principle was
employed by the student to select a design with a similar
footprint shape, and further adjustments were made to
enhance this characteristic. Building upon this selected
design, the student further rationalized the massing form of
the structure and integrated additional design elements
such as circulation, structure, and building façade (middle
section of Fig. 12).
As demonstrated in the lower section of Fig. 12, a
distinct feature characterizing the building is a stepped
volume gradually descending from south to north. This
feature effectively conceals the smaller and lower volumes
on the northern side under the shadows cast by the taller
and larger volumes on the southern side, thereby reducing
the overall surrounding masking effect of the target
building. This characteristic aligns with the passive design
strategy of solar envelopes (Knowles, 2003), which can be
observed in most optimized designs listed in the upper left
section of Fig. 12. In addition to the stepped volume, other

elements contributing to improved daylighting include slattype blocks with shallow floor plans on the southern side
and an internal atrium. Furthermore, by gathering predominantly on its western facade, this stepped volume also
provides self-shading against direct solar exposure during
summer afternoons.

4.3. Commercial building design
In the third example, EvoMass was applied to a commercial
building complex situated in Shanghai’s dense urban environment, characterized by numerous high- and middle-rise
buildings and a public park on its northern side. Unlike the
previous two examples where optimization was primarily
aimed at performance improvement, in this case, optimization is integrated into the design development and coevolutionary process. In this example, students were
instructed to reflect on the optimization results, which
further motivated them to iteratively reformulate the
optimization problem to guide the optimization toward
producing more satisfactory designs.
At the initial stage of design, two performance objectives were considered: maximizing daylight accessibility
within the building and minimizing sunlight obstruction
towards the public park. Similar to the first case-study
example, these optimized designs fail to meet the desired
aesthetic quality; however, in contrast to the first example
where students manually synthesized emerging performance implications and patterns into the design synthesis,
this group of students chose to embed their architectural

1413

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Fig. 12

The final design.

design intent within the optimization process itself. Their
design intent was encoded as soft constraints through
additional reward or penalty functions. The outcomes from
these additional functions were combined with original
performance evaluation functions using a scalarization
method.
The first intent is to maximize rooftop surfaces to provide outdoor space and viewing decks. Consequently, designs featuring a greater number of roof surfaces are
awarded, thereby driving the optimization process toward
seeking designs with multiple staggered roof surfaces. The
second intent is that the building entrance should be
retreated from the site boundary to create a semi-outdoor
public space for gathering purposes. To this end, an
entrance space is defined, and designs that minimize
encroachment into this area are awarded. As a result, many
high-fitness designs depicted in Fig. 13 feature a cantilevered block over the entrance area.
Finally, the students selected one high-fitness design
that was considered to be visually appealing and spatially
feasible for the room arrangement. Thereafter, adjustments were made to the original building massing form,
enhancing the overall clarity of spatial relationships. The

final design is illustrated in Fig. 14, effectively addressing
both performance objectives and architectural design
intent.
Regarding building performance, the strip-shaped
building massing with shallow floor plans facilitates better
daylighting conditions. Additionally, by lowering the height
of the northwest corner of the building massing, it mitigates the masking effect of the building volume and allows
more sunlight to reach the public park on the north. In
contrast, this feature is absent in the northeast corner due
to being already overshadowed by surrounding buildings. In
terms of architectural design intent, the interlocking volume creates more rooftop spaces while a cantilevered
block provides a semi-outdoor space that bridges between
urban environment and indoor areas.

4.4. Design results analysis
The above examples demonstrate how the application of
EvoMass can provide designers with both tangible and abstract information pertaining to building design, thereby
assisting them more efficiently in tackling data-poor situations and open-ended design problems at early design

1414

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422

Fig. 13 The composition of the final fitness function and the produced optimization result (Dashed box: The selected design for
further development, the fitness is the combined score calculated based on the product of all the included evaluation metrics, thus
it only reflects the ranking of these design options).

stages. The utilization of optimization-based design exploration enables designers to uncover latent design problems
or unknown design constraints associated with building
performance and built environment, facilitating them to
better formulate more relevant design objectives and
concepts that align with the specific environmental context
and the pursuit of high-performing building designs.
Furthermore, the optimization-based design exploration
can also supplant the laborious trial-and-error process
inherent in the conventional typology-first-optimizationsecond design approach. In such processes, designers have
to conceive building typologies and manually modify and
update the typologies in search of performance improvement. Nevertheless, the selected building typology might

Fig. 14

be suboptimal due to the lack of a systematic design
exploration.
The design process of the three examples can be further
abstracted and categorized into two design process models
(Fig. 15). The first model describes the design process
observed in the first two examples (Sections 4.1 and 4.2)
and is depicted in the upper diagram of Fig. 1-1. This model
prioritizes the width of the design exploration and examines how building forms respond to various performance
factors. In this model, designers initially identify specific
performance implications from different sets of optimized
or sampling designs, followed by a manual synthesis of acquired information into the design development process.
This model allows designers to gather diverse references

The final design work.

1415

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Fig. 15

Design process model abstracted on the basis of the three studio design examples described in Section 4.

and maintain parallel thoughts at the beginning of the
design process. In the above examples, this “width-first”
exploration helps the students overcome the common
novice tendency towards a “depth-first” design approach
(Cross, 2021). In this regard, this model also cultivates
students’ ability to develop a top-down and breadth-first
design skill that typically requires more experience to
acquire.
The second model describes the design process in the
last example (Section 4.3) and corresponds to two feedback
loops displayed in Fig. 1-2 and 1-3. This model prioritizes
the depth of the design exploration, in which design problem framing and design optimization are intertwined. In
this process, designers continuously reformulate the optimization problem and iteratively re-calibrate the optimization search according to the feedback obtained from the
prior optimization runs. This model can be considered a
“Meta-search” in Gero and Kazakov’s exploration-based
evolutionary model (Gero and Kazakov, 1996) and an
example of a human-computer co-evolutionary design
process (Dorst and Cross, 2001; Maher, 2000). This model
also illustrates how EvoMass can enhance designers’
moving-seeing-moving actions (Schön, 1992) in digital
design scenarios while enabling informed decision-making
and performance-aware architectural design.
The two models reveal two possible approaches for
optimization-based design exploration, which align with
two established design methodologies identified in relevant

design theories as mentioned above. In these two models,
the flexibility and agility of EvoMass play a critical role in
making such design processes feasible within a narrow
timeframe. Furthermore, it is anticipated that these
models can be applied to other design scenarios without
reliance on EvoMass. The key lies in perceiving computational design optimization not only as a means of numerical
improvement but also as a way to explore diverse solution
spaces or facilitate design reflection.
Regarding design synthesis, the three examples demonstrate how building performance can serve as a driving
force in the design development process and contribute to
defining the final architectural form. However, it is worth
noting that despite certain modifications made by the students to the generated designs, the formal language
inherited from subtractive and additive algorithms, characterized by orthogonal volumes, remained discernible in
all final works. As mentioned in Section 3.5, we envision
that more experienced designers may deviate further from
the generated designs by employing a more intricate design
synthesis approach that leverages information and knowledge extracted from optimization to conceive novel design
solutions.
In terms of design information and knowledge extraction, the utilization of SSIEA empowers designers with
optimization results encompassing multiple highperformance designs. The extraction of design information and knowledge is achieved through an analysis of

1416

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422
commonalities among these designs. Note that EvoMass itself does not directly provide designers with explicit design
information and knowledge. Thus, the interpretation and
prior knowledge of designers, particularly in relation to
environmental design and passive building strategies, are
essential for extracting such information. In this regard, it
was observed that certain students involved in the presented examples encountered difficulties in discerning the
building typology or strategy from the optimization result
due to their limited experience.
The presented examples demonstrate a preference for
the additive generation algorithm among students, primarily due to its ability to generate geometrically complex and architecturally interesting designs compared to
the subtractive generation algorithm. Consequently, in
studio design tasks with fewer constraints than realworld projects, students showed a greater inclination
towards designs with less commonality to ordinary
building forms. Furthermore, as EvoMass does not
consider internal partitions, it implies a “function follows
form” design process. In this regard, encouraging students to consider other design factors such as circulation
and building skins may facilitate more radical changes or
deviations from the generated design by forcing them to
reconfigure or recompose the spatial configuration of the
design.

5. User survey
In addition to the examples presented above, a questionnaire survey was conducted in order to better understand
the utility of EvoMass and identify its potential limitations.
The survey primarily investigates the utility of EvoMass in
architectural design exploration, the extent to which the
orthogonal geometry can hinder design creativity, and the
key differences between EvoMass and other related design
tools. The survey was sent not only to the students from the
above examples but also to the external users who downloaded it from Food4Rhino, receiving 37 anonymous responses. The details of the questionnaire are presented in
Appendix A.
The first question surveys the respondents’ background,
and most of the respondents have an architecture or urban
design background (Fig. 16). Thus, the survey can primarily
reflect the attitude from the perspective of architectural
designers. Nevertheless, considering the limited number of
questions and respondents, we acknowledge that the

Fig. 16

Fig. 17

Responses to Question 2.

survey only provides anecdotal evidence supporting the
usefulness of EvoMass.
Questions 2 and 3 reflect the usage of EvoMass. The
result shows that approximately 30% of respondents have
utilized EvoMass in real-world design projects (Fig. 17) and
over two-thirds of respondents employed EvoMass to acquire performance-based design concepts and inspiration
(Fig. 18). However, about 43.2% of the respondents also
utilized it to identify high-performance design solutions
from the optimization result (Fig. 18), suggesting that many
users still prioritize seeking solutions when using EvoMass.
Questions 4 and 5 reflect the efficiency of EvoMass, and
most respondents agreed that it effectively facilitates
design ideation, exploration, and conceptual development
(Fig. 19). Additionally, approximately 40% of respondents
did not view orthogonal geometry as a significant
constraint on design creativity. In contrast, it is worth
mentioning that 45% of responses still fell under the “fairly
limiting” category, including five professional designers
(Fig. 20), which deviates from our initial expectation that
experienced designers would be less influenced by
orthogonal geometry.
Question 6 compares EvoMass with other relevant software tools and plugins, and most respondents recognized
that EvoMass is more suitable for early-stage architectural
design and easier to use than other optimization tools
(Fig. 21). In addition, one response also explicitly elaborated that EvoMass is “more useful for massing studies,
while other software tools are largely focused on façade
and fenestration studies”.
In summary, the survey findings generally support the
assumed utility of EvoMass in architectural design; however, they also indicate that for higher-level information
extraction and knowledge abstraction, EvoMass is more

Fig. 18

Responses to Question 1.

1417

Responses to Question 3.

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Fig. 19

Fig. 21

Responses to Question 4.

complex than initially anticipated. Furthermore, despite
respondents being asked to compare EvoMass with other
relevant tools in the survey, a thorough and consistent examination is still required to identify the strengths and
weaknesses of EvoMass through specific design scenario
comparisons for future improvements.

6. Discussion and conclusion
6.1. Implications to tool development, research,
and education
Despite the increasing availability of tools and studies
dedicated to early-stage performance-based design optimization, it remains uncommon to find applications and
research that surpass primitive manipulation of building
forms, such as the previously mentioned twisted and folded
geometries. The utilization of EvoMass exemplifies an efficient approach toward implementing computational design
optimization at a more abstract level of design exploration,
ideation, and synthesis, thereby potentially enhancing its
practical applicability.
The examples in Section 4 demonstrate that the application of EvoMass can be more closely aligned with architects’ existing divergent exploration and convergent
exploitation cycles in conceptual design (Cross, 2021).
Research on computational design optimization often
narrowly focuses on solving specific sub-problems, disregarding how these solutions contribute to designers’
systematic and holistic understanding of the overall design

Fig. 20

Responses to Question 5.

Responses to Question 6.

problem. EvoMass and the associated design exploration
method take a broader approach by integrating computational design optimization into the overall design process
rather than providing end solutions. Furthermore, it exemplifies a potential co-evolutionary design process in
performance-based building design.
Regarding architectural education in computational
design, EvoMass simplifies the teaching and learning of
computational design optimization, enabling students to
allocate more time and effort toward design exploration
and ideation processes. By understanding the advantages of
employing computational techniques, students become
self-motivated with a stronger incentive to delve deeper
into computational design approaches. This is further
exemplified by a recent teaching experiment involving
EvoMass, which successfully accommodated over 200 students in learning computational design optimization for
early-stage architectural design within a span of six weeks
(Wang et al., 2023). This stands in contrast to many existing
pedagogical methods that require students to spend a significant amount of time acquiring relevant parametric
modeling and computational design skills before they can
start experimenting (Vazquez, 2023). Furthermore, when
utilizing EvoMass in design education, its capacity for
generating diverse design strategies aids students in overcoming fixation on a single solution, providing an intuitive
means for developing a sense of exploration within their
learning processes.

6.2. Limitations and future research
The presented examples and the user feedback survey
demonstrate the efficacy of EvoMass in early-stage architectural design, thereby highlighting its potential for
practical application. Recent advancements in research
pertaining to design creativity and cognition have unveiled
a number of unexplored avenues that warrant further
investigation.
First, in the presented examples, it is common for designers to conduct multiple optimization processes to
comprehend the impact of design parameters on building
performance and their interrelationships when utilizing
EvoMass. However, designers are faced with the manual
management of numerous design populations and

1418

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422
optimization results from previous optimization runs. This
concern has also garnered attention from the research
community (Cristie and Joyce, 2021; Woodbury et al.,
2017), leading to the development of tools like GHShot
and Interactive Design Galleries that aim to enhance data
visualization and management for parametric design
exploration. Consequently, future research will explore
possibilities in developing a workspace dedicated to managing, documenting, and visualizing multiple optimizations
in order to facilitate information and knowledge extraction. In this regard, a prototype system has been developed to support such multi-optimization design exploration
(Wang et al., 2023).
Second, the visual examination of the building’s geometry plays a crucial role in extracting information using
EvoMass. In the aforementioned teaching examples, students still faced challenges in identifying commonalities
from a substantial number of design options, which can be
mentally demanding and particularly daunting for novice
designers. Although the embedded island-based evolutionary algorithm already incorporates some level of implicit clustering, additional forms of analysis could alleviate
the cognitive burden. Future research will explore methods
capable of providing supplementary feedback to designers
regarding design populations. Various approaches can be
considered to quantify similarities and differences among
designs (Brown and Mueller, 2019) as well as to cluster or
organize designs in a more structured manner (Harding,
2016; Yousif and Yan, 2019). Moreover, the recent advancements in Large Language Models and Multimodal
Models for Visual-Question-Answering could also assist designers, particularly those with limited expertise, in identifying the design typology and strategies implied by
optimized designs (Agrawal et al., 2015).
Third, as demonstrated in the teaching examples, the
final designs still exhibit a significant commonality with
those generated by subtractive and additive algorithms in
terms of orthogonal geometry. However, feedback from
the survey also indicates that relying too heavily on
orthogonal geometry can lead to preconceptions and stifle
creativity. Therefore, future research will explore strategies that focus less on generating orthogonal geometric
forms and instead prioritize abstract information that
supports design decision-making. In this regard, applying
our proposed design approach to real-world projects with
experienced architects is a critical step toward further
examining its potential and limitations in architectural
design. Additionally, the recent advancements in Generative AI, such as image generation, could potentially facilitate designers in exploring massing designs that transcend
orthogonal geometry when integrated with EvoMass (Zhong
et al., 2024).
Lastly, the two generation algorithms currently work
separately; thus, the tool cannot generate building massing
designs incorporating both subtractive and additive strategies simultaneously. Nevertheless, the incorporation of
the two strategies could produce designs with higher formal
flexibility and variability, and, as a result, may reveal richer
and more precise design implications pertinent to the given

performance objective. Thus, the combination of the two
strategies in design generation will be investigated in the
future.

6.3. Conclusion
The development of EvoMass aims to facilitate an iterative
and typology-oriented design optimization and exploration
process for performance-based building massing design.
This paper presents a key concept that addresses the issue
of typological inflexibility in performance-based design
optimization, enabling a typology-oriented design optimization and exploration approach for early-stage architectural design. By utilizing subtractive and additive
algorithms, EvoMass enables the generation of diverse
building massing design options with varying typologies.
These options provide both tangible and abstract information pertaining to building performance and typologies. The
presented examples demonstrate how EvoMass and the
associated design exploration method can assist designers
in addressing data-poor and open-ended design tasks from
perspectives related to building performance and the built
environment. Furthermore, these examples emphasize that
EvoMass does not diminish or replace architects’ role in
architectural design; instead, it fosters a co-evolutionary
human-machine design process. By synergizing human
creativity with computational capabilities, more practical
support can be offered by EvoMass in resolving complex
real-world building design challenges.

Ethics statement
The authors declare that their Institutional Ethics Committee confirmed that no ethical review was required for
this study. Written informed consent for participation was
not required because all participants’ data was anonymized
before the statistical analyses were done.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment
This study is supported by the Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool
University Research Development Fund (RDF-23-01-107)
and the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(52178017). In addition, the authors would like to thank Dr.
Francesco De Luca (Tallinn University of Technology) for his
detailed and valued comments and suggestions, as well as
the students who contributed to the design examples presented in this paper: Han Zhang, Yuhui Shen, Yifan Chen,
and Qin Yuan for the first design example; Mengya Jiao for
the second design example, and Yuhan Chen, Youyu Lu,
Tianyi Gu, and Zhirui Bian for the third design example.

1419

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji

Appendix A
Table A.1

The Questionnaire for the User Survey

Question 1 (Single
Choice)

Education and Professional
Background

Question 2 (Single
Choice)

What area do you use
EvoMass for?

Question 3 (Multiple
Choice)

What is the main reason you
use EvoMass?

Question 4 (Linear
Scale)

How do you evaluate
EvoMass in terms of its
efficacy for design ideation,
design exploration, and
conceptual development?
How do you evaluate the
boxy orthogonal building
massing volume generated
by EvoMass limiting the
design creativity?

Question 5 (Linear
Scale)

Question 6 (Optional,
Multiple Choice
with open
comments)

 Architecture or Urban design
 Building engineering
 Building science
 Other
 Research
 Real-world design projects
 Studio design projects
 Other
 Find specific high-performing design solutions
 Obtain performance-based design concepts and/or
inspiration
 Extract performance-related information and/or design
knowledge
 Other
For score 1: EvoMass cannot offer any benefit in design
ideation and exploration or in overcoming design fixation.
For score 5: the result produced by EvoMass can provide
very essential information, inspiration, or solutions for the
design ideation and synthesis.
For score 1: the boxy forms do not limit the design
creativity, and users can gain information, insight, or
inspiration from the result produced by EvoMass and apply
these to the design and to develop solutions beyond the
boxy forms. For score 5: the boxy forms strongly limit the
design creativity, resulting in strong bias or preconceived
ideas as well as making the design become stuck in the
orthogonal geometries.
 EvoMass can provide information/insight for understanding the design problems
 EvoMass can provide practical and/or intriguing building
massing solutions for design tasks
 EvoMass can provide inspiration for ideation and conceptual developments
 EvoMass is more suitable for early-stage architectural
design
 EvoMass is easier to use
 EvoMass provides more useful functions (data recording,
automatically create backup files, etc.)
 Other

If you have experience in
using other relevant design
generation or optimization
tools, such as Galapagos,
Octopus, Wallacei, and
Wasp, what aspects of
EvoMass do you find
different from these tools?

References
Agrawal, A., Lu, J., Antol, S., Mitchell, M., Batra, D., Zitnick, C.L.,
Parikh, D., 2015. VQA: visual question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2015 Inter, pp. 2425e2433.
Bradner, E., Iorio, F., Davis, M., 2014. Parameters tell the design
story: ideation and abstraction in design optimization. In: 2014
Proceedings of the Symposium on Simulation for Architecture &
Urban Design, pp. 172e197.
Brown, N.C., Mueller, C.T., 2019. Quantifying diversity in parametric design: a comparison of possible metrics. AI EDAM (Artif.
Intell. Eng. Des. Anal. Manuf.) 33 (1), 40e53.
Caldas, L., 2008. Generation of energy-efficient architecture solutions applying GENE_ARCH: an evolution-based generative
design system. Adv. Eng. Inf. 22 (1), 59e70.

Chaszar, A., Joyce, S.C., 2016. Generating freedom: questions of
flexibility in digital design and architectural computation. Int.
J. Architect. Comput. 14 (2), 167e181.
Chen, K.W., Choo, T.S., Norford, L., 2019. Enabling algorithmassisted architectural design exploration for computational
design novices. Computer-Aided Design & Applications 16 (2),
269e288.
Chen, K.W., Janssen, P., Schlueter, A., 2018. Multi-objective
optimisation of building form, envelope and cooling system for
improved building energy performance. Autom. ConStruct. 94
(July), 449e457.
Chen, Y., Lu, Y., Gu, T., Bian, Z., B, L.W., Tong, Z., 2022. From
separation to incorporation - a full-circle application of
computational approaches to performance-based architectural
design. In: Proceedings of the 2021 DigitalFUTURES. Springer,
Singapore, pp. 189e198.

1420

Frontiers of Architectural Research 13 (2024) 1400e1422
Ching, F.D.K., 2007. Architecture: Form, Space, and Order, Third.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Ciardiello, A., Rosso, F., Dell’Olmo, J., Ciancio, V., Ferrero, M.,
Salata, F., 2020. Multi-objective approach to the optimization
of shape and envelope in building energy design. Appl. Energy
280 (August), 115984.
Coates, P., Derix, C., 2014. The deep structure of the picturesque.
Architect. Des 84 (5), 32e37.
Cristie, V., Joyce, S.C., 2021. Versioning for parametric design
exploration process. Autom. ConStruct. 129 (June), 103802.
Cross, N., 2021. Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product
Design, fifth ed. Wiley.
Dino, I.G., 2016. An evolutionary approach for 3D architectural
space layout design exploration. Autom. ConStruct. 69,
131e150.
Dorst, K., Cross, N., 2001. Creativity in the design process: Coevolution of problem-solution. Des. Stud. 22 (5), 425e437.
Dy, B., Stouffs, R., 2018. Combining geometries and descriptions A
shape grammar plug-in for grasshopper. ECAADe 2018 2
(September 2018), 499e508.
Ekici, B., Cubukcuoglu, C., Turrin, M., Sariyildiz, I.S., 2019.
Performative computational architecture using swarm and
evolutionary optimisation: a review. Build. Environ. 147
(October 2018), 356e371.
Estrado, E., Turrin, M., Eigenraam, P., 2023. Optimization of
complex-geometry high-rise buildings based on wind load
analysis. SIMULATION 99 (11), 1133e1146.
Gero, J.S., Kazakov, V.A., 1996. An exploration-based evolutionary
model of a generative design process. Comput. Aided Civ.
Infrastruct. Eng. 11 (3), 211e218.
Zhong, C., Shi, Y., Cheung, L.H., Wang, L., 2024. AI-enhanced
performative building design optimization and exploration: a
design framework combining computational design optimization
and generative AI. In: Gardner, Nicole, Herr, C.M., Wang, L.,
Toshiki, H., Khan, S.A. (Eds.), ACCELERATED DESIGN - Proceedings of the 29th CAADRIA Conference, 1. Association for
Computer-Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia (CAADRIA), Hong Kong, pp. 59e68.
Greer, E., & Lucas, R. The Most Timeless Design Differentiator Is
Technology.
Harding, J., 2016. Advances in architectural geometry 2015 dimensionality reduction for parametric design exploration. In:
Advances in Architectural Geometry 2016. vdf Hochschulverlag
AG an der ETH Zürich, pp. 204e221.
Harding, J., Brandt-Olsen, C., 2018. Biomorpher : interactive
evolution for parametric design. Int. J. Architect. Comput. 16
(June), 144e163.
Harding, J.E., Shepherd, P., 2017. Meta-parametric design. Des.
Stud. 52, 73e95.
Harding, J., Joyce, S., Shepherd, P., Williams, C., 2013. Thinking
topologically at early stage parametric design. In: Advances in
Architectural Geometry 2012. Springer, Vienna, pp. 67e76.
Huang, Y.S., Chang, W.S., Shih, S.G., 2015. Building massing optimization in the conceptual design phase. Computer-Aided
Design and Applications 12 (3), 344e354.
Janssen, P., Bui, T.D.P., Wang, L., 2022. Möbius evolver: competitive exploration of urban massing strategies. In: As, I., Basu, P.,
P, B.T.-A.I., U, P., Talwar, D. (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in
Urban Planning and Design. Elsevier, pp. 293e321.
Ji, Y., Xu, M., Zhang, T., He, Y., 2023. Intelligent parametric
optimization of building atrium design: a case study for a sustainable and comfortable environment. Sustainability 15 (5),
4362.
Jin, J.T., Jeong, J.W., 2014. Optimization of a free-form building
shape to minimize external thermal load using genetic algorithm. Energy Build. 85, 473e482.
Joyce, S.C., Ibrahim, N., 2017. Exploring the evolution of meta
parametric models. In: Disciplines and Disruption - Proceedings

Catalog of the 37th Annual Conference of the Association for
Computer Aided Design in Architecture, ACADIA 2017,
pp. 308e317.
Knowles, R.L., 2003. The solar envelope: its meaning for energy
and buildings. Energy Build. 35 (1), 15e25.
Koenig, R., Yufan, M., Knecht, K., Aichinger, A., Konieva, K., 2020.
Integrating urban analysis, generative design, and evolutionary
optimization for solving urban design problems. Environ. Plan. B
Urban Anal. City Sci. 47 (6), 1e17.
Konis, K., Gamas, A., Kensek, K., 2016. Passive performance and
building form: an optimization framework for early-stage design
support. Sol. Energy 125, 161e179.
Lawson, B., 1990. How Designers Think: the Design Process
Demystified. Elsevier/Architectural.
Li, S., Liu, L., Peng, C., 2020. A review of performance-oriented
architectural design and optimization in the context of sustainability: dividends and challenges. Sustainability 12 (4), 1427.
Lin, B., Chen, H., Yu, Q., Zhou, X., Lv, S., He, Q., Li, Z., 2021.
Moosas e a systematic solution for multiple objective building
performance optimization in the early design stage. Build. Environ. 200 (January), 107929.
Luca, F. De, Dogan, T., Sepúlveda, A., 2021. Reverse solar envelope
method . A new building form-finding method that can take
regulatory frameworks into account. Autom. ConStruct. 123
(September 2020), 103518.
Maher, M.L., 2000. A model of Co-evolutionary design. Eng. Comput. 16 (3e4), 195e208.
Marsault, X., Torres, F., 2019. An interactive and generative ecodesign tool for architects in the sketch phase. J. Phys. Conf.
1343 (1), 012136.
Müller, P., Wonka, P., Haegler, S., Ulmer, A., Van Gool, L., 2006.
Procedural modeling of buildings. ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers
on - SIGGRAPH ’06 1 (212), 614.
Nault, E., Waibel, C., Carmeliet, J., Andersen, M., 2018. Development and test application of the UrbanSOLve decisionsupport prototype for early-stage neighborhood design. Build.
Environ. 137 (March), 58e72.
Psarras, S., Kosicki, M., El-Ashry, K., Tarabishy, S., Tsigkari, M.,
Davis, A., Aish, F., 2020. SandBOX - an intuitive conceptual
design system BT - impact: design with all senses. In:
Gengnagel, C., Baverel, O., Burry, J., Ramsgaard Thomsen, M.,
Weinzierl, S. (Eds.), DMSB 2019: Impact: Design with All Senses.
Springer International Publishing, pp. 625e635.
RAMBOLL. SiteSolve.
Schön, D.A., 1992. Designing as reflective conversation with the
materials of a design situation. Knowl. Base Syst. 5 (1), 3e14.
Sheikholeslami, M., 2010. Design space exploration. In:
Woodbury, R. (Ed.), ELEMENTS OF PARAMETRIC DESIGN, first ed.
Routledge, pp. 275e287.
Si, B., Wang, J., Yao, X., Shi, X., Jin, X., Zhou, X., 2019. Multiobjective optimization design of a complex building based on an
artificial neural network and performance evaluation of algorithms. Adv. Eng. Inf. 40 (April), 93e109.
Sidewalk Labs. Delve.
Simitch, A., Warke, V., 2014. The Language of Architecture: 26
Principles Every Architect Should Know. Rockport Publishers.
Tian, Z., Zhang, X., Jin, X., Zhou, X., Si, B., Shi, X., 2018. Towards
adoption of building energy simulation and optimization for
passive building design: a survey and a review. Energy Build.
158, 1306e1316.
Turrin, M., Von Buelow, P., Stouffs, R., 2011. Design explorations of
performance driven geometry in architectural design using
parametric modeling and genetic algorithms. Adv. Eng. Inf. 25
(4), 656e675.
Valiyappurakkal, V.K., Shabarise, Y., Natawadkar, K., Misra, K.,
2022. A methodology to assess the constructibility of free-form
buildings using building and surface performance indicators:
application to a case study. Energy Build. 270, 112303.

1421

L. Wang, P. Janssen and G. Ji
Vazquez, E., 2023. Teaching parametric design: fostering algorithmic thinking through incomplete recipes. Open House Int. 49
(4), 736e751.
von Richthofen, A., Knecht, K., Miao, Y., König, R., 2018. The
‘Urban Elements’ method for teaching parametric urban design
to professionals. Frontiers of Architectural Research 7 (4),
573e587.
Wang, L., 2022a. Understanding the span of design spaces. In:
Gerber, D., Pantazis, E., Bogosian, B., Nahmad, A., Miltiadis, C.
(Eds.), CAAD Futures 2021: Computer-Aided Architectural
Design, Design Imperatives: the Future Is Now, 1465. Springer,
Singapore, pp. 288e297.
Wang, L., 2022b. Optimization-aided design: two approaches for
reflective exploration of design search space. Int. J. Architect.
Comput. 20 (4), 758e776.
Wang, L., 2022. Workflow for applying optimization-based
design exploration to early-stage architectural design e
case study based on EvoMass. Int. J. Archit. Comput. 20 (1),
41e60.
Wang, L., Chen, K.W., Janssen, P., Ji, G., 2020a. Algorithmic
generation of architectural massing models for building design
optimisation - parametric modelling using subtractive and additive form generation principles. In: RE: Anthropocene, Design
in the Age of Humans - Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Computer-Aided Architectural Design Research
in Asia, CAADRIA 2020, 1, pp. 385e394.
Wang, L., Chen, K.W., Janssen, P., Ji, G., 2020b. Enabling
optimisation-based exploration for building massing design - a
coding-free evolutionary building massing design toolkit in
rhino-grasshopper. In: RE: Anthropocene, Design in the Age of
Humans - Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on
Computer-Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia, CAADRIA
2020, 1, pp. 255e264.
Wang, L., Janssen, P., Bui, T.D.P., Chen, K.W., 2023a. Comparing
design strategies: a system for optimization-based design
exploration. In: HUMAN-CENTRIC, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference of the Association for Computer-Aided
Architectural Design Research in Asia (CAADRIA), 1,
pp. 221e230.
Wang, L., Janssen, P., Chen, K.W., Tong, Z., Ji, G., 2019. Subtractive building massing for performance-based architectural
design exploration : a case study of daylighting optimization.
Sustainability 11 (24), 6965.
Wang, L., Janssen, P., Ji, G., 2018. Utility of evolutionary design in
architectural form finding: an investigation into constraint
handling strategies. In: Gero, John S. (Ed.), Design Computing
and Cognition, 18. Springer, pp. 177e194.

Wang, L., Janssen, P., Ji, G., 2020. SSIEA: a hybrid evolutionary
algorithm for supporting conceptual architectural design. AI
EDAM (Artif. Intell. Eng. Des. Anal. Manuf.) 34 (4), 458e476.
Wang, L., Janssen, P., Stouffs, R., 2023b. Teaching Computational
Design Optimization - an experimental course for performancebased building massing exploration. In: Digital Design Reconsidered - Proceedings of the 41st Conference on Education and
Research in Computer Aided Architectural Design in Europe
(ECAADe 2023), 1, pp. 179e188.
Wang, L., Luo, T., Shao, T., Ji, G., 2023c. Reverse passive strategy
exploration for building massing design-An optimization-aided
approach. Int. J. Architect. Comput. 21 (3), 445e461.
Wang, L., Tan, Z., Ji, G., 2016. Toward the wind-related building
performative design. Living Systems and Micro-Utopias: Towards
Continuous Designing. In: Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computer-Aided Architectural Design Research
in Asia (CAADRIA 2016), pp. 109e218.
Woodbury, R.F., Burrow, A.L., 2006. Whither design space? AIE EDAM:
AI EDAM (Artif. Intell. Eng. Des. Anal. Manuf.) 20 (2), 63e82.
Woodbury, R., Mohiuddin, A., Cichy, M., Mueller, V., 2017. Interactive design galleries: a general approach to interacting with
design alternatives. Des. Stud. 52, 40e72.
Wortmann, T., Nannicini, G., 2017. Introduction to architectural
design optimization. In: Karakitsiou, A., Migdalas, A.,
Rassia, S.T., Pardalos, P.M. (Eds.), City Networks: Collaboration
and Planning for Health and Sustainability. Springer International Publishing, pp. 259e278.
Wu, W.-L., 2022. Generative Design with Building Performance
Optimization in the Initial Stage of Architectural Design Process.
Cheng Kung University.
Yi, Y.K., Malkawi, A.M., 2012. Site-specific optimal energy form
generation based on hierarchical geometry relation. Autom.
ConStruct. 26, 77e91.
Yousif, S., Yan, W., 2019. Shape clustering using K-medoids in architectural form finding. In: Communications in Computer and Information Science, CCIS, 1028. Springer, Singapore, pp. 459e473.
Zhang, H., Wang, L., Ji, G., 2021. The Synergy of building massing and
facade - an Evo-Devo approach for performance-based design
optimization combining facade design with building massing. In:
Globa, T.T. S. Lo A., van Ameijde, J., Fingrut, A., Kim, N. (Eds.),
Projections - Proceedings of the 26th International Conference of
the Association for Computer-Aided Architectural Design
Research in Asia, CAADRIA 2021, 1, pp. 451e460.
Zhang, L., Zhang, L., Wang, Y., 2016. Shape optimization of freeform buildings based on solar radiation gain and space efficiency using a multi-objective genetic algorithm in the severe
cold zones of China. Sol. Energy 132, 38e50.

1422

